FILE: Competition Rules AAA Updated Aug 2024.pdf
PAGES: 39

--- page 1 ---
 
 JUN3FEFH6I 
AUSTRALIAN AXEMEN’S 
ASSOCIATION 
(Incorporated 19/10/93) 
 
 
 
COMPETITION RULES 
and 
CODE OF CONDUCT 
for 
THE CONDUCT OF WOODCHOPPING 
AND SAWING CONTESTS 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised August 2024 


--- page 2 ---
 
 2 
COMPETITION RULES 
 
 
 Table of Contents:     Rule #   Page 
Introduction         4 
  
1. Entries       1-6   4 - 7 
Performances Information    7-9 
Registered Events     10-11    
Handicapping      12-19    
Notification of Events on the Day   20-23 
Scratching      24-26 
Non-Appearance of Competitor   27-31    
2. Dress       32-37   7 - 8 
3. Sponsor Logo and Embellishment Restrictions 38-46   8 - 9 
4. Setting up of Logs     47-53    
The Draw      54-57   
Logs       58-65    
Practice      66-67 
5. Persons Allowed in Arena    68-75   10 - 11 
6. Axes and Saws     76-79   11 
7. Starting      80   11 
8. Competition      81-92   12 - 24 
Junior Level Competitors    93-103    
Slabbing      104-106 
Hard Hitting      107 -120 
Sawing       121-126 
Tree Felling      127-131 
Underhand      132-134 
Standing      135-136 
Novice Contest     137 
Relay Contests     138-145 

--- page 3 ---
 
 3 
 
Table of Contents:     Rule #   Page 
Combination Contests     146-149 
Axe Throwing      150-158 
Chainsaw Contests     159-200 
9. Protests      201-207  24 
10. Timing       208   24 
11. Log Inspection After cutting    209   24 
12. Judging      210-211  24 - 25 
13. Prize Money      212-214  25 
14. AAA Championship Rules    215-244  25 - 28 
15. Dimensions and Spacing recommendations  245-250  28 
16. The Committee     251-252  28 - 31 
Role of Officials     253-254 
Conduct & Discipline     255-264 
Appeal from Decision of a Committee   265-270 
17. Disciplinary Role of the AAA    271-275  31 - 32 
Disputes Committee     276-277 
18. Media Exposure     278   32 
19. Responsibilities for Possessions   279   32 
20. Relay Rules – ADDITIONAL RULES   280-287  32 - 33 
21. Definitions         34 - 37 
22. Code of Conduct        38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- page 4 ---
 
 4 
 
THESE RULES APPLY TO ALL WOODCHOPPING AND SAWING COMPETITIONS 
CONDUCTED BY OR UNDER THE AUSPICES OF: 
 
➢ The Australian Axemen's Association (AAA), 
➢ Any State Axemen's Association that is a member of the AAA (in these Rules 
called a SAA), 
➢ Any local, district or regional association that is a member of a SAA - in these 
Rules called a Local Association), 
➢ Any Royal Show Society that adopts these Rules as applying to a Competition 
conducted by such a Society. 
➢ Note: words that are capitalized are defined under Definitions or in the body of 
the Rules. 
 
KNOWLEDGE AND BINDING EFFECT OF RULES 
➢ It is the responsibility of all Competitors to be thoroughly conversant with these 
Rules.  Ignorance of any Rule is not an excuse. 
➢ At a Competition, these Rules are binding on all persons present, including 
persons who are not a Competitor. 
RISK WARNING 
➢ The sport of woodchopping and sawing is very strenuous.  Axes and saws are 
also very sharp and could inflict serious personal injury (including death).  As 
such, participation in a Competition may pose a risk to the health and wellbeing of 
a Competitor.  By entering a Competition, each Competitor is representing to the 
Committee that he is fully fit, sufficiently experienced, and capable of safely 
participating and has not been advised otherwise by a medical practitioner. 
INDEMNITY 
➢ By entering a Competition, each Competitor agrees that he is present at and 
competes in the Competition entirely at his own risk.  Each and every Competitor 
at a Competition releases, indemnifies and holds harmless the Committee, the 
AAA, each SAA, each Local Association and each Royal Show Society that 
adopts these Rules, in respect of all claims, costs, demands, liabilities and 
proceedings arising out of or in any way related to the Competition or anything 
arising therefrom or connected therewith, including as a result of negligence. 
➢ The indemnity by a Competitor in Rule 4 extends to and applies for the benefit of 
the Committee, the AAA, each SAA and each Local Association in respect of any 
claim, costs, demands, liabilities and proceedings by or on behalf of a person 
(whether or not that person is a Competitor) who suffers loss, damage or injury 
arising out of or in any way related to any act or omission (whether or not 
intentional or accidental) by the Competitor. 
 
 
 
 

--- page 5 ---
 
 5 
ENTRIES 
1. A person is not eligible to enter a Competition unless that person is, at the date of entry:  
(a) a paid-up member of a Local Association, or 
(b) in the case of a person normally residing outside of Australia, is a paid-up member 
of an association representing participants in the sport of woodchopping and 
sawing that is recognized as such by the AAA and, if applicable, by the relevant 
Royal Show Society. 
(See also Rule 81) 
2. (a) If a Royal Show Society wishes to refuse a competitor entry to a show, they must 
first provide the details of reason for the proposed action and obtain permission from the 
AAA.  The AAA will respond within 14 days. 
(b) All other shows and carnivals must take the same action with the Local or State 
Association as is applicable. 
(c) If the AAA approves the actions, they also reserve the right to provide additional 
penalties if they believe the situation warrants. 
3. An Entry Form will not be accepted unless accompanied by the prescribed entry fee. 
4. If a Competitor seeks to enter an Event for which the Competitor is not eligible, the entry 
fee will be refunded. 
5. Whether before or after the closing date for entries: 
(a) the number of Competitors in any Event may be limited, 
(b) the order in which Events are conducted may be varied. 
6. If an Event has an age restriction, the Entry Form must be accompanied by a copy of the 
person's birth certificate, or such other proof of age as may be acceptable to the 
Committee. 
PERFORMANCES INFORMATION 
7. If required by the Committee, a Competitor must submit with his entry particulars of his 
last 6 performances, failing which the entry will be rejected. 
8. If required by the Committee, a Competitor whose entry for a Competition has been 
accepted must also submit particulars of all performances since the date on which the 
entry was submitted. 
9. A Competitor who fails to comply with Rule 13 may be Disqualified from competing at the 
Competition in question. 
REGISTERED EVENTS 
10. Except as provided in the following Rule, a person must not enter or compete in an 
Unregistered Competition.  Any person acting in breach of this Rule may be Disqualified 
from competing in any Competition for such time as the relevant SAA determines. 
11. Rule 15 does not apply to a demonstration of woodchopping or a charity competition that 
has been approved as such by the relevant SAA, or to such other competition as the SAA 
may determine. 

--- page 6 ---
 
 6 
HANDICAPPING 
12. Competitors in Events conducted in heats or divisions shall be handicapped at the 
discretion of the Committee or, if appointed, the Handicapper. 
13. Handicaps will be determined based on form, inherent ability and performances and such 
other information as may be deemed by the Committee, or Handicapper, to be relevant. 
14. The decision of a Committee, or a Handicapper, in respect of a Competitor's handicap is 
final and may not be challenged, the subject of a Protest or called into question by any 
person. 
15. To the extent practicable, information concerning heats or divisions and applicable 
handicaps will be publicized on a notice board in the vicinity of the Handicapper's office or 
work area during the day before a particular Event is scheduled to take place. 
16. The handicap of a Competitor may be adjusted at any time during the course of a 
Competition in such manner as the Committee or, if appointed, the Handicapper 
considers appropriate. 
17. Handicaps are to be calculated to the nearest second. 
18. The minimum handicap for a Competitor is 3 seconds. 
19. Despite Rule 20, it is the sole responsibility of the Competitor to be aware of his handicap. 
NOTIFICATION OF EVENTS ON THE DAY 
20. To the extent reasonably practicable in the circumstances, Competitors will be notified, 
via a public address system, if available, approximately 10 minutes before an Event is due 
to commence. 
21. The Committee reserves the right to alter the published start times for Events, and any 
such alteration on the day of the Competition will be notified to Competitors as provided in 
Rule 25 or in such other manner as may be in use at the Competition. 
22. Despite Rules 25 and 26, it is the sole responsibility of the Competitor to be aware of the 
time Events are due to commence. 
23. In the event of wet weather or other sufficient reason, the Committee may postpone or 
cancel any Event and any Competition.  In the event of any such cancellation or 
postponement, the Committee may, in its absolute discretion, refund all or part of the 
entry fees paid by Competitors or may apply those fees towards the cost of entry to a 
subsequent Competition. 
SCRATCHING 
24. Scratching’s must be notified to the Committee, or Handicapper, no later than 1 hour 
before the Event in question is scheduled to commence. 
25. Unless the Committee decides otherwise, a Competitor who scratches from, or fails to 
compete in, or complete, an Event is not entitled to any refund of entry fee. 
26. Unless the Committee decides otherwise, a Competitor who scratches from a heat after 
the handicaps applicable to that heat have been made public cannot compete in another 
heat for the same Event. 

--- page 7 ---
 
 7 
NON-APPEARANCE OF COMPETITOR 
27. A Competitor who has not scratched but who fails to appear for an Event at the time the 
Event is due to commence forfeits the entry fee paid in respect of that Event and at the 
discretion of the Committee, may be liable to the following additional penalties: 
(a) for a heat, $50 
(a) for a final or semi-final, $100 
(b) for a Championship, $200. 
28. (a) A Competitor who gains a place in an Event and does not appear for the 
presentation of Awards is liable to a penalty of $200. 
(b) At a Competition conducted by a Royal Show Society, a Competitor who is 
requested, or required, to attend a presentation of Awards, or any other form of 
presentation, but does not attend, is liable to a penalty of $200. 
29. The penalties provided for in Rules 32 and 33 are payable forthwith.  Until such penalty 
has been paid, the Competitor is automatically Disqualified from competing in any further 
Events at the Competition or any other subsequent Competition. 
30. Any penalty suffered by a Competitor that is not paid may be deducted from any prize 
money that the Competitor may have won. 
31. Rules 32 and 33 do not apply when the Competitor's non-appearance is due to injury, 
illness, or other good and sufficient reason that the Committee, in its sole discretion, may 
accept. 
DRESS 
32. Unless determined otherwise by the Committee, all persons competing (or, in the case of 
a Deputy or a Wedger, assisting) in an Event must be dressed as follows: 
(a) long white trousers. 
(b) boots or shoes that are presented in a neat, tidy manner. 
(c) a singlet which must be white or such other colour and design as the Committee 
provides or in its discretion considers appropriate, having regard to the Event in 
question. 
(d) all Competitors in Underhand Events must wear chain mesh socks whilst 
competing, and  
(e) all Competitors in Standing Block Events must wear chain mesh shin guards 
whilst competing. 
33. All Competitors, Deputies and Wedgers must always keep their Dress in a clean and tidy 
condition.  A Competitor, Deputy or Wedger whose Dress is not clean and tidy may be 
directed to change his Dress. 
34. A Competitor who fails (or whose Deputy or Wedger fail) to comply with Rules 32 and 33 
may be scratched from any Event in question by the Committee. 
35. All Officials at a Competition whose responsibilities require them to enter the Arena must 
be dressed as provided in Rules 32 and 33 unless the Committee has prescribed a 
different dress code for Officials at the Competition in question. 

--- page 8 ---
 
 8 
36. Each Competitor who gains a place in an Event and is by these Rules required at the 
presentation of Awards must be dressed as required by Rules 32 and 33.  A Competitor 
who is not so dressed may be penalized 10% of any prize money won by the Competitor 
in the Event in question. 
37. At a presentation of Awards, a Competitor must not hold or display anything relating to 
any sponsorship or other support the Competitor may have received, except as expressly 
permitted by these Rules. 
SPONSOR LOGO AND EMBELLISHMENT RESTRICTIONS 
38. Singlets provided to axemen for competition must provide an area for individual sponsor 
logo no smaller than the current 100mm x 100mm on either side on the chest and an 
additional 150mm x 300mm horizontal panel of the back of the shirt with the lowest 
section at least 150mm from the bottom of the garment.  
39. Embellishments and logos on competition pants are to be restricted to four areas of 
150mm x 400mm on the lateral thigh and lateral calf of each leg. The placement and use 
of the logos should be such that the pants retain a predominantly white appearance.  
40. Logos (including the existing logos on the shirt) must have a minimum 15mm clearance 
around all marks.  
41. Any additional embellishments such as sponsor logos are the athlete’s sole responsibility. 
This can only be undertaken following distribution of the singlets. 
42. No embellishments are to be printed over existing embellishments and logos on the shirt.  
43. Australian representative axe persons are permitted to place a rectangular Australian flag 
measuring 80mm x 40mm on their competition singlet provided the placement follows the 
guidelines outlines and that the placement of this embellishment has been approved.  
44. Logos representing tobacco, spirits and products containing any substance on the WADA 
prohibited list are not permitted.  
45. Both political (I.e., the promotion of any political parties, associations, movements, ideas, 
or any other political cause) and religious or anti-religious advertising and logos are 
prohibited. 
46. Polo shirts/t-shirts/jackets of any promotional material provided it complies with Rule 44 
and 45, is not of an offensive nature and will not damage the image of woodchopping in 
anyway may be worn at all other times in the ring other than during competition and when 
participation in presentations.  
SETTING UP OF LOGS 
47. Competitors have sole responsibility for the correct, safe and secure setting up of logs.  A 
Competitor may delegate the task, but not the responsibility, of setting up to a Deputy. 
48. In respect of a Tree Felling Event: 
(a) the Competitor is solely responsible for safely and securely affixing the log to the 
tree. 
(b) the Committee is solely responsible for ensuring that the tree is safely secured in 
the device holding the tree upright. 
49. If any Official considers that a log has not been correctly, safely, and securely set up, that 
Official may require the Competitor to forthwith re-set the log (for which a reasonable time 
will be allowed).  A Competitor who does not promptly comply with this Rule may be 
Disqualified by the Official from the Event in question. 

--- page 9 ---
 
 9 
50. Competitors (or a Deputy who is assisting the Competitor with setting up the log) must be 
at their log in sufficient time to complete setting up before the time at which the Event is 
scheduled to start. 
51. Competitors in Underhand and Standing Block Events must set up their logs so that they 
finish the contest facing the Judge (unless directed otherwise by the Official in Charge) 
52. In the case of a Tree Felling Event, Competitors must set up their logs at least 45 minutes 
before the scheduled Start Time (or such other time as the Committee in its discretion 
may direct).   
53. In the case of all other Events (except Tree Felling) and to the extent practicable, the log 
must be completely set up no less than 5 minutes before the scheduled Start Time. 
THE DRAW 
54. Logs will be numbered and will be allocated by lot drawn by an Official in the presence of 
a Competitor for the Event concerned or, if no such Competitor is immediately available, a 
Competitor in another Event. 
55. The draw will be conducted in such a manner that the result is random.  The result of the 
draw may then be transcribed onto a card or label and affixed to the appropriate log.  
Alternatively, the result of the draw may be written on the log. 
56. A Competitor may only chop, or saw, the log drawn for that Competitor.  A Competitor 
who changes, or attempts to change, the log allocated to that Competitor, without the 
prior approval of the Official in Charge, is immediately Disqualified from all Events in the 
Competition (including Events already conducted at that Competition, in respect of which 
the Competitor also forfeits any Award  won). 
57. In relay Events, where logs are the same size, Competitors may choose which logs they 
cut in a particular manner. 
LOGS 
58. All logs intended for use in a Competition are and unless sold pursuant to the following 
Rule, remain the property of the Committee. 
59. Subject to Rule 66, if a log is for any reason not required for an Event or for the 
Competition, it may be purchased by a Competitor for practice or testing. 
60. Any logs not sold to a Competitor pursuant to Rule 59 may be sold or disposed of by the 
Committee in such manner and to such persons as the Committee deems fit. 
61. Logs may be of any variety of timber approved by the Committee and the variety, or any 
particular log, may (subject to Rule 62) be changed by the Committee without notice.   
62. Different varieties of timber may be used for individual Events, save that for each 
particular Event, all the logs must be from the same tree. 
63. Logs used in a Competition must comply with the following provisions: 
(a) logs must be measured by diameter and not by girth or circumference. 
(b) a diameter that is as uniform as practical within a tolerance of plus or minus 2mm 
(save for Championship Events, where the tolerance is reduced to plus or minus 
1mm); 
(c) a minimum length of 610mm for logs intended for chopping. 

--- page 10 ---
 
 10 
(d) in the case of logs intended for sawing, logs of any length may be used, as 
determined by the Committee, provided that a minimum of 50mm (or such greater 
amount as the Committee in its discretion may decide) is allowed per cut for logs 
under 500mm in diameter and 75mm (or such greater amount as the Committee 
in its discretion may decide) is allowed per cut for logs over 500mm in diameter. 
64. All measurements are to be undertaken with a metal tape measure graduated in metric 
measurements, with all measures being correct within 1mm.  Approved diameter 
measurements are 250mm, 275mm, 300mm, 325mm, 350mm, 375mm, 400mm, 450mm, 
500mm, 600mm and 750mm. 
65. Any dispute or difference relating to the logs must be notified to the Official in Charge 
prior to the commencement of the Event in question.  The Official in Charge will make a 
decision in respect of the dispute or difference, which decision is final and binding and not 
subject to appeal or Protest by any person. 
PRACTICE 
66. A Competitor: 
(a) must not practice or test an axe or saw in the Arena. 
(b) may only practice or test an axe or saw on a log that the Competitor has first 
purchased, as provided by Rule 59 above. 
67. A log may not be removed from the Arena before the Event in respect of which the log 
was intended. 
PERSONS ALLOWED IN ARENA 
68. During the setting up of logs for an Event, the only persons permitted into the Arena are: 
(a) the Competitor in the Event in question. 
(b) only one other person who is acting as the Deputy for a Competitor, 
(c) Officials, 
(d) guests of Officials. 
69. Principal responsibility for ensuring compliance with Rule 68 rests on the Competitor.  A 
Competitor who fails to assist an Official in the enforcement of Rule 68 may be scratched 
from the Event in question by the Official in Charge. 
70. During the conduct of an Event, the only persons permitted into the Arena are: 
(a) the Competitor. 
(b) in the case of a sawing Event, the Wedger for a Competitor competing in that 
Event. 
(c) in the case of a Tree Felling Event, the board puller for a Competitor. 
(d) in the case of a Junior Event, a coach or parent or guardian as provided in Rule 
100; 
(e) Officials. 
71. In sawing Events, the Wedger must not enter the Arena before the Competitor for whom 
he is acting as Wedger has been called for the Event.  A Wedger must comply with the 
dress Rules that apply to a Competitor (see Rules 32 and 33 above). 

--- page 11 ---
 
 11 
72. At the end of an Event, no person other than an Official may enter the Arena until the "all 
clear" is given. 
73. At the end of an Event, no person (including a Competitor) other than an Official shall 
approach a Competitor or inspect the Equipment or the log prior to the "all clear" being 
given, 
74. A Junior or Novice Competitor is only allowed in the Arena for setting up and cutting a log 
for their Event, unless special permission to be in the Arena on another occasion has 
been provided by an Official. 
75. Except as provided in Rules 68 to 74 above, no person may enter, traverse or remain in 
an Arena, unless that person is undertaking a specific task at the direction of the Official 
in Charge. 
AXES AND SAWS 
76. Unless immediately required for use in an Event, axes and saws must always be covered 
on the cutting edge in such a manner that injury to any person cannot occur. 
77. All axes must be 
(a) securely pinned with at least one 3mm pin that protrudes continuously through the 
axe head and axe handle and thus secures the handle to the axe and 
(b) upon demand by an Official, immediately produced for inspection by any Official. 
78. Any non-compliance with Rule 77 will result in: 
(a) the immediate Disqualification of the Competitor concerned for that day of 
Competition (including in respect of Events in which the Competitor may already 
have competed on that day); 
(b) forfeiture of an Award already won by the Competitor at the Competition. 
(c) the imposition of such fine, being no more than $200, as the Committee considers 
appropriate in the circumstances, which fine is payable forthwith; and 
(d) the Competitor being ineligible from competing at any Competition until such time 
as the Competitor has satisfied the Committee and the relevant SAA that all axes 
brought, or that may be brought, into an Arena by the Competitor have been 
satisfactorily pinned. 
79. Except in the case of hard hitting (refer Rule 111), axes: 
(a) must be of a type approved by the Committee, 
(b) must be of conventional type with one continuous cutting edge, 
(c) otherwise, may be of any weight or blade width. 
STARTING  
80. A Competitor who starts cutting before the Start Time will be disqualified.  If an event is 
recorded using technology, the Judge and the Office in charge, or his deputy, may have 
access to what is shown on the recording in coming to a decision.  If the event is recorded 
using technology, a competitor may protest, within the allocated time, their own 
disqualification but not any other competitor/s. 
(a) The commencement of which a Championship event / Relay is to commence on is 
to be the count of 3. 

--- page 12 ---
 
 12 
COMPETITION 
81. Notwithstanding compliance with Rule 1, a person is not eligible to compete unless as at 
the date of the Competition:  
(a) if normally resident in Australia, the Competitor is a registered and duly paid-up 
member of a Local Association, or  
(b) in the case of a Competitor normally resident outside of Australia, the Competitor 
produces, on demand, documentary evidence that he is a paid up member of an 
association representing participants in the sport of woodchopping and sawing 
that is recognized as such by the AAA and, if applicable, the relevant Royal Show 
Society. 
82. Woodchopping and sawing contests will be conducted in heats, semi-finals, and finals, or 
as otherwise determined by the Committee having regard to the number of Competitors. 
83. Competitors in heats must continue chopping (or sawing) until at least 3 other 
Competitors have severed their logs.  A Competitor who fails to adhere to this Rule may 
be subject to Disqualification or such other penalty as the Committee decides, unless the 
Judge is satisfied that the Competitor is suffering from exhaustion, or has a damaged axe 
or saw, or should be excused for other sufficient reason. 
84. Before the Start Time, neither a Competitor nor his Deputy, nor any other person, is 
permitted to make any mark with an axe or saw on the log, provided that in an Underhand 
Event the Competitor (or his Deputy) may make a foothold and in a Standing Block Event, 
a doghold. Breach of this Rule will result in Disqualification.  This Rule does not apply in 
the case of certain Junior level Events - see Rule 103. 
85. Pushing or pulling the log with an axe, or pushing the log with a foot or hand including the 
application of undue pressure to the loose (ie unfixed) end after the last blow has been 
delivered by raising the foot and kicking downwards, forwards or backwards, will result in 
Disqualification. 
86. Except when setting up and securing a log, a Competitor must not cut or trim the log, or 
hit it with any part of the axe. 
87. Logs may be washed but only with water and may also be brushed.  Any bark may be 
removed but only with the back of an axe. 
88. Axes and saws must completely sever logs into at least 2 parts. 
89. During the conduct of an Event, no person may render physical assistance of any kind to 
a Competitor, except in the case of injury to or illness of the Competitor (having first 
obtained permission from the Official in Charge or the Judge), or in an emergency. 
90. At the completion of chopping or sawing, Competitors must remain at their logs until the 
"all clear" is given. 
91. Other than in the case of Tree Felling: 
(a) the Judge has a discretion to direct a Competitor in any Event to cease competing 
after 2 minutes from the Start Time, or at any time if in the opinion of the Judge 
the Competitor appears to be unwell or in undue distress; 
(b) despite (a), a Competitor who has not completely severed his log within 3 minutes 
from the Start Time may be directed by the Judge to cease chopping or sawing. 
A direction by the Judge pursuant to (a) or (b) above may not be the subject of a Protest 
or appeal of any kind. 

--- page 13 ---
 
 13 
92. Rule 91 applies in the case of Tree Felling, except that the times are altered to 8 minutes 
and 12 minutes respectively. 
JUNIOR LEVEL COMPETITORS 
Categories of Events 
93. Events, in which a Junior may compete, may be categorized as follows: 
(a) Division A - in which only a person who has attained the age of 5 years but has 
not, as at the date of the Competition, attained the age of 13 years may compete. 
(b) Division B - in which only a person who has attained the age of 13 years but has 
not, as at the date of the Competition, attained the age of 18 years may compete. 
94. Despite Rule 93(a),  
(a) a Local Association has the non-delegable responsibility of ensuring that in respect of Events 
at Junior level conducted by that Local Association, every Competitor has the required 
experience, skill and ability to participate in the Events in a manner that is safe for the Competitor 
and other persons at, or in the vicinity of, the Competition.  If the Local Association is uncertain as 
to the experience, skill and ability of the Competitor, the Local Association may determine that  
the ages of 5 and 13 years are increased to such greater age as the Local Association considers 
is appropriate, having regard to the experience, skill and ability of the Junior(s) in question.  
(b)  a Local Association may decide that a person is not eligible for admission as a member of 
that Local Association, at Junior level, until that person has attained an age greater than 5 years 
and has the required experience, skill and ability to participate in an Event in a manner that is 
safe for the Competitor and other persons at, or in the vicinity of, the Competition. 
(c)  a Local Association may also decide that a person admitted to membership of that Local 
Association, at Junior level, is only eligible to participate in an Event of a nominated Discipline. 
Eligibility 
95. A person is not eligible to enter a Competition at Junior level unless that person is of an 
age that falls within either Division A or Division B as set out in Rule 93 and is a member 
of a Local Association. 
96. A person is not eligible to enter a Competition at Junior level unless: 
(a) The person's Entry Form requires the provision of all the information set out 
immediately below and that information is in fact provided in or attached to the 
Entry Form, and 
(b) The Entry Form is signed by the person seeking to compete and countersigned by 
a person purporting to be a parent or lawful guardian of the person. 
The information required by this Rule 96 is as follows: 
• Proof of the age of the person in question - either by supplying a copy of the 
person's birth certificate or such other document, issued by a department of 
government, which shows the person's age. 
• Particulars of the person's experience with an axe or (if applicable) saw, such as 
to demonstrate that the person has achieved either through training, coaching or 
experience, a level of competency that should enable the person to compete at 
Junior level without injury to himself or any third party. 
• The weight of the axe that the person is permitted to use, as determined by the 
Local Association of which the person is a member. 

--- page 14 ---
 
 14 
• A statement by the person purporting to be a parent or lawful guardian of the 
person, 
(i) acknowledging that in the case of accident or injury to the Competitor, 
responsibility rests solely with the parent (or guardian, as the case may 
be) and not the AAA, the relevant SAA or the Local Association, or the 
Committee, and 
(ii) pursuant to which that parent or guardian (as the case may be) agrees to 
indemnify the AAA, the relevant SAA, the Local Association and the 
Committee against any claim of any kind or description by or on behalf of 
the person. 
The acknowledgment and indemnity in this Rule 96, together with the provisions of Rules 
4 and 5, apply notwithstanding that an Entry Form may not have been provided in respect 
of the Competition, or of the Event in question, or that any such any Entry Form provided 
does not comply with the requirements of this Rule 96. 
Dress 
Competency (Junior and Novice level) 
97. in addition to complying with Rule 37 in relation to Dress, a person may compete at Junior 
and / or Novice level in underhand events only if the person wears chain mesh socks and 
if so decided by the relevant SAA or Local Association, or by the parent or guardian of the 
person, leggings.  Chain mesh leggings are mandatory for standing events.  A person 
who does not comply with this Rule is automatically ineligible for the Event in question 
and will not be allowed to compete in that Event.  Further, if a person competes in an 
Event in breach of this Rule, the person is not eligible for any Award in respect of the 
Event and will be deemed to have finished last. 
98. Notwithstanding that an entry from a person seeking to compete at Junior or Novice level  
has been accepted, the Judge or the Official in Charge may require that before the person 
is permitted to compete, the person demonstrates sufficient competency in respect of the 
Discipline in question.  If for any reason it is considered by the Judge or the Official in 
Charge that the person is insufficiently competent to be allowed to compete in an Event, 
that person is automatically ineligible to compete (in which event the entry fee paid by or 
on behalf of that person may be, at the discretion of the Committee, refunded). 
99. If during the course of an Event at Junior or Novice level the Judge or the Official in 
Charge is of the opinion that the Competitor is not displaying sufficient competency or is 
exhausted or in such a physical state that the Competitor ought not be permitted to 
continue, the Competitor must, if directed by the Judge or Official in Charge, cease 
chopping (or sawing, as appropriate).  A Competitor who fails or refuses such a direction 
from the Judge or Official in Charge is automatically ineligible to compete in any 
subsequent Events at the Competition. 
Competition 
100. (a) During the conduct of a Division A Event, either the coach or a parent or guardian 
(in each case being a paid up member of a Local Association) of that Junior 
Competitor must be present in the Arena, but must at all times during the Event: 
(i) remain in such place within the Arena as the Judge or the Official in 
Charge nominates. 
(ii) conduct himself in an orderly and appropriate manner. 
(b) A person who does not comply with paragraph (a) must, if so directed by the 
Judge or Official in Charge, forthwith leave the Arena, failing which the Competitor 
may be directed to cease chopping (or sawing, as appropriate) and/or may be 

--- page 15 ---
 
 15 
Disqualified.  Where a person concerned has left the Arena, the Judge may, at his 
discretion, permit a substitute to enter the Arena. 
(c) In the case of a Division B Event, a coach or parent or guardian of the Competitor 
may, at their option, be present in the Arena.  In all other respects, paragraphs (a) 
and (b) apply. 
101. A Junior Competitor who is competing may only use an axe not exceeding a weight that 
has been determined by the Local Association of which the Junior Competitor is a 
member.   However, if it appears to the Judge or the Official in Charge that the axe is too 
large or heavy for the Competitor, the Competitor may be directed by the Judge or Official 
in Charge to use a different axe that is more suited to the Competitor. 
102. Rule 73 applies. 
103. In the case of a Division A Event, the Judge or the Official in Charge may, at their 
discretion and despite Rules 84, permit the Competitor (or a coach, parent or guardian in 
the Arena, in each case being a paid up member of a Local Association) to make a small 
starting or guiding cut in the log before the commencement of the Event. 
SLABBING 
Note:  (a) Option A below automatically applies to a Competition, unless the relevant 
SAA determines and announces prior to the Competition, that option B will 
apply. 
 
(b) Option B cannot apply to an Australian or World Title Event (except in the 
case of such an Event conducted by a Royal Show Society) 
 
(Option A) 
104. It is the responsibility of the Competitor to take precautions to prevent slabbing.  A 
Competitor who cuts a Slab from their log is liable to Disqualification.  However, the 
Competitor will not be Disqualified if they sever the slabbed piece of timber without 
assistance from any other person and before the next Competitor is finished and before 
the "all clear" is given.  This Rule also applies in the case of an unsevered splinter, if the 
splinter does not exceed 12mm in thickness in its greatest dimension at the saw cut, 
foothold or doghold end: however, this exception does not apply if the log is held together 
by that splinter, irrespective of how thin the splinter may be. 
(Option B) 
105. Rule 104 above applies.  However, should a Competitor take precautions to prevent 
slabbing and such precautions are deemed adequate by the Official in Charge or his 
deputy, or comply with the method prescribed by the Committee, and a Slab occurs, the 
Competitor will not be disqualified, unless the Judge is satisfied that the Slab was 
produced intentionally. 
106. Permitted anti-slabbing precautions are: 
• Nailing the end of the log, 
• Banding the end of the log with wire, strapping or tape, 
• Any other method prescribed by the Committee. 
HARD HITTING 
Title Events 
107. All World and Australian championship hard hitting Events must be Restricted Events. 

--- page 16 ---
 
 16 
108. A SAA may decide, in respect of a State Title, that a hard-hitting Event will be either a 
Restricted Event or an Unrestricted Event.  The decision must be advertised in the 
program for the Event. 
Unrestricted Event 
109. Hard hitting may be either a Standing Block, or Underhand, as the Committee decides.  
The Competitor must completely sever (ie no remaining splinters) the log within 2 minutes 
of the Start Time.  An Official must not inspect the log before the expiration of 2 minutes, 
unless the Competitor has indicated that he has finished chopping.  The Competitor may 
not thereafter resume chopping. 
110. Despite Rule 105, all Slabs must be completely severed, irrespective of the precautions 
taken to prevent slabbing. Should a chip be lying in the scarf f in such a way that in the 
Competitor's opinion it would constitute a risk of injury to the Competitor or a third party if 
another blow was struck, the Competitor must remove the chip using the back of the axe 
only to push the chip clear from the scarf.  Removal of the chip in this manner does not 
constitute a blow.  However, removal of the chip with the cutting edge of the axe or 
striking the chip with the back of the axe head in a manner that advances the competitors 
cut, does count as a blow.  If a competitor pushes or removes the chip in a manner that is 
deemed advantageous to severing the log, the Competitor may be penalized with an 
additional blow.   A Competitor who uses any part of his body to remove a chip will incur 
Disqualification. 
111. Axes of any size, weight or shape may be used. 
112. A Competitor may rest the axe on the block between blows to assist balance, but in doing 
so must not touch the Scarf with the cutting edge of the axe: to do so will be counted as a 
blow.  
Restricted Event 
113. Rule 109 applies.  However, the Committee may alter the 2-minute time period to suit 
wood types. 
114. The axe must be of a type approved by the Committee and must not exceed 3kg in 
overall weight and the cutting edge must not exceed 180mm in width.  
115. A Competitor must not twist or wrench the axe or remove or break a chip by movement of 
the axe head, after the Competitor has completed the blow and the blade of the axe has 
finished its penetration into the wood.  Each breach of this Rule shall add an extra hit to 
the score.   
116. Pushing a chip with the nose of the axe constitutes a blow and is counted as a hit. 
117. A Competitor will incur Disqualification if the Competitor: 
(a) touches by hand any part of the Scarf; 
(b) in the opinion of the Judge, has deliberately split the log. 
Applicable to both Restricted and Unrestricted hard hitting 
118. A chip must be lifted or dislodged from each side of the block. 
119. In the event of a tie in the number of hits, placings will be determined by the fastest times. 
120. In hard hitting using a Standing Block, the Scarf is to be cut using the conventional 
method.  In particular, the V cut is prohibited. 

--- page 17 ---
 
 17 
SAWING 
121. The competitor must, to the best of their ability, start their cut within the allocated amount 
of wood. In the instance of the unfixed end not being square, the allocated amount of 
wood shall be measured from the shortest distance from the fixed end to the unfixed end. 
The competitor may be disqualified if they complete their cut in a manner that impedes 
the following competitors sawing that log from completing their cuts. 
122. Lubricant may be used on a saw prior to and during an Event. 
123. The saw cut must saw through the log from one side only.  For the avoidance of doubt, 
Rules 104 and 105 apply to sawing. 
124. In the case of single-handed sawing, the free end of the saw must be free of any handle 
or any weight device. 
125. A Wedger must stand at the opposite end of the log to the saw cut but must not in any 
way touch or guide a saw or that portion of the log which is being sawn off.  Any breach of 
this Rule will incur Disqualification for the Competitor and, if applicable, the team of which 
the Competitor is a member. 
126. All saws used by Competitors must be of a type approved by the Committee. 
TREE FELLING 
127. Trimming of tree poles is permitter to the competitor’s discretion in order to make it safe 
for the competitor to climb the tree pole but must not inhibit the next competitor to climb 
this pole. 
128. Cutting of practice board holes in trees erected for Competition is prohibited. 
129. Competitors must put 3 boards into a tree above each other in the following manner: 
(a) the first board must be approximately 1 metre from the ground with the toe of the 
board inserted into a new board hole cut by the Competitor; 
(b) the second board must be approximately 2 metres from the ground - otherwise as 
per (a); 
(c) the third board must be approximately 3 metres from the ground - otherwise as 
per (a). 
From the third board the Competitor must cut the front Scarf, then descend, removing 
each board to the ground, then ascend on the other side of the tree, placing the boards as 
provided in (a), (b) and (c) above, and from the third board continue cutting. 
130. (a) Logs must not be cut from one side only. 
(b) All boards must be positioned in a board hole without any handling or supporting 
device. 
(c) The Competitor must not have any attachment from their person to the tree or any 
device which could assist them to remain on the board, except that a non-skid 
surface on the upper surface of the board and /or the soles of the Competitor's 
shoes is permitted. 
(d) Cutting into previous board hole/s if permitted only if the competitor has 
commenced in a neutral position between the two bottom existing board holes, but 
disqualification can occur if acting in an intentional manner as to be of an 
advantage. 

--- page 18 ---
 
 18 
131. Two board trees shall be cut in the manner described in Rules 129 and 130, unless the 
Committee decides otherwise. 
UNDERHAND CONTESTS 
132. A Scarf must be cut clear of both footholds.  A Competitor who cuts into a foothold is 
Disqualified. 
133. A Competitor must only cut whilst standing on the log. If the Competitor is dislodged from 
their position on the log before the log is completely severed, they must reposition 
themselves on the log before continuing to chop.  However, a Competitor may get off a 
log to cut a Slab which may be chopped where it lies or after the Competitor has placed 
the Slab on the log. 
134. The cut must be made by cutting the Scarf on the front side of the log to about halfway 
through, then a Scarf must be made on the back side of the log and chopping continue 
until the log is completely severed. 
STANDING BLOCK CONTESTS 
135. A Scarf must be cut clear of all dogholds.  A Competitor who cuts into a doghold is 
Disqualified. 
136. Rule 134 applies to this contest.  Circumferential cutting of the log is prohibited. 
NOVICE CONTESTS 
137. A Novice Competitor ceases to be Novice in a Discipline if the Competitor wins an Open 
Event in the same Discipline. 
RELAY CONTESTS (see also Rules 280 - 287) 
Butcher's Block (one Competitor at a time) 
138. The first Competitor commences the chop by opening a Scarf and cutting into the log to 
approximately half way through, during which time the Competitor’s partner Competitor 
must remain in a neutral area as defined by the Committee. Upon completion of their cut, 
the first Competitor must retire to the neutral area.  The partner Competitor then 
commences cutting by opening a Scarf on the opposite side of the log and cutting until the 
log is completely severed, during which time the first Competitor must remain in the 
neutral area.  Circumferential cutting of the block is prohibited. 
139. Once the partner Competitor has commenced cutting, the first Competitor must not cut or 
touch the log.  Breach of this Rule will result in Disqualification of both Competitors. 
Butcher's Block (two Competitors at a time) 
140. The two Competitors may cut the log either alternatively or simultaneously from both 
sides or, when the block is greater than 500mm in diameter, simultaneously on the same 
side. 
141. A Competitor must not, in the Committee's opinion, intentionally split the top or bottom of 
the Scarf.  Breach of this Rule will result in Disqualification of both Competitors. 
Team Relay 
142. Teams of Competitors shall be as approved by the Committee.  Each team must appoint 
a team captain. 
143. During the contest, the team captain may stand adjacent to the next Competitor to cut and 
as soon as the previous Competitor has completed the cut, tell that Competitor to 

--- page 19 ---
 
 19 
commence cutting.  If a Competitor commences cutting before the previous Competitor 
has finished cutting, or the team captain tells the Competitor to start cutting before the 
previous Competitor has completed the cut, the team is automatically Disqualified. 
144. Prior to completion of the second last cut, the team captain must move to their cutting 
position.  The team captain must not commence cutting until the previous team 
Competitor has completed the cut. Should the team captain start cutting before the 
previous Competitor has completed the cut, the team is automatically Disqualified. 
145. (a) Except for the team captain, all team members must remain at their respective 
blocks after they have completed their cut until the last cut has been completed. 
(c) Where, in a team relay Event, all blocks are of the same diameter, those blocks 
may be drawn in team lots and place by the team in any position. 
COMBINATION CONTESTS 
146. In a single man contest, the Competitor must cut 2 logs each: one Underhand and one 
Standing Block.  The Underhand must be cut first and immediately that log is completely 
severed, the Competitor must cut the Standing Block.  After commencing to cut the 
Standing Block, the Competitor cannot return to the Underhand log. 
147. In a two-man combination, the first Competitor must cut the Underhand log first and if 
both Competitors are using the same axe, immediately that log is completely severed, the 
first Competitor must place the axe against a log for the second Competitor to pick up and 
commence cutting the Standing Block, until it is completely severed. If the Competitors 
are not using the same axe, the second Competitor must not commence cutting until after 
the first Competitor has finished cutting. 
148. In both single man and two-man combinations, the Competitors may set up the logs in 
any way they choose (provided that the logs are of the same diameter), except that in the 
interests of safety, the Judge or the Official in Charge may direct the Competitors to re-
position the logs. 
149. Rules 132 to 136 apply to combination contests. 
AXE THROWING 
150. The axe must be double bitted (two cutting edges), weigh 1.25kgs and be of a length 
(including the axe head) of 61cm.  The axe blade must not exceed 15.3cm in any 
dimension. 
151. The target must be between 750cm and 910cm in diameter and have 5 scoring areas: a 
bull's eye of 100mm in diameter, next an inner area of 100mm surrounded by 3 ringed 
areas adjusted according to the diameter of the target.  Consecutively outwards, the 
scores are bull's eye 5, then 4, 3, 2, 1. 
152. Measured from the centre of the bull's eye, the target must be 1.5m from the ground. 
153. A Competitor must stand no less than 6.1m from the target. 
154. Depending on the number of Competitors, this contest may comprise a single Event or 
two preliminary heats followed by a final Event. 
155. (a) In the preliminary heats, scores from the heats are added, with the ten highest 
scorers going into the final Event.  
(b) If 2 Competitors have the same score, they are each to have one additional throw 
(in the order they have been competing), with the highest scorer winning.   

--- page 20 ---
 
 20 
156. Prior to commencement of the contest, each Competitor is allowed one practice throw at 
the target.  Any further practice throws at the target will result in automatic 
Disqualification. 
157. Following the practice throw (if availed of), the Competitor has 3 scoring throws per round.  
The leading edge of the axe is the scoring edge; the axe must remain in the target until 
inspected by the Judge.  If the axe fails to stay in the target and falls to the ground, before 
inspection by the Judge, no score is awarded. 
158. The leading edge of the axe need only break the outer line of any scoring area for that 
area to be counted as the score.  If both edges of the axe stick into the target, no score is 
awarded. 
CHAINSAW CONTESTS  
159. In respect of any Chainsaw Event, and any Open Hotsaw Event, if there is any 
inconsistency between Rules 160 to 200 and any other Rule, Rules 160 to 200 prevail to 
the extent of the inconsistency. 
Entries 
160. A person is not eligible to enter a Chainsaw Event unless the Entry Form is accompanied 
by a copy of a document that certifies that the person has been formally accredited or 
licensed by an appropriate organization to use a Chainsaw.  The Committee has 
complete discretion to assess the appropriateness of the accrediting organization. 
Competition requirements 
161. Whilst competing in a Chainsaw Event, a Competitor must wear: 
(a) tight fitting clothing. 
(b) long trousers and safety chaps. 
(c) head, eye and ear protection. 
(d) steel capped safety boots. 
all of which must be marked with an Australian Standards mark to indicate suitability for 
use when operating a Chainsaw. 
162. A Competitor who does not comply in all respects with the requirements of Rule 161 is 
automatically ineligible to compete in the Chainsaw Event in question. 
163. This rule covers all chainsaws, modified saws and hotsaws, 
It is the responsibility of the competitor to ensure that when the chainsaw, modified saw or 
hotsaw is in use, no wood or shavings is ejected such that it could hit another person.  It 
is the responsibility of the Committee conducting the event, to take steps, including the 
provision of screens (front and rear) of which need to be made of impenetrable material 
and must be 1.8m in height and 1.2m wide, to facilitate the competitor’s compliance with 
the Rule. 
Chainsaw requirements 
164. All Chainsaws used, or intended to be used in a Chainsaw Event must: 
(a) be in good working order and condition. 
(b) have a complete sprocket cover, no loose handles or broken components. 

--- page 21 ---
 
 21 
(c) have a chain catcher; 
(d) when not in use, have a bar cover over the chain and bar. 
Chainsaw use 
165. Except when undertaking Maintenance, no person may start, or attempt to start, a 
Chainsaw in any place other than in the Arena and adjacent to the block intended to be 
cut. 
166. A Chainsaw may only be started by a person who is attired as described in Rule 161. 
167. There are two ways to hold the chain saw during the start:  
(a) On the ground - Place the chain saw securely on the ground – assume a steady 
stance - the saw chain must not touch any objects or the ground. With the left 
hand on handlebar, press the chain saw firmly against the ground – thumb 
wrapped around the handlebar. Step into the rear handle with the right foot or step 
on the rear hand guard with the heel of the right foot; or 
(b) Between the knees or thighs - Clamp the rear handle between the knees or 
thighs. Grip the handlebar firmly with the left hand – thumb wrapped around the 
handlebar.  
Other starting manners are considered unsafe. Starting the saw in an unsafe manner 
(i.e.drop start) will result in a disqualification. 
If after three pulls the saw has not started the Athlete may turn the saw over to the 
designated technician by giving a signal to the Judges.   
168. Maintenance of a Chainsaw may only be undertaken in an area outside the Arena that 
has been nominated by the Committee for such use.  
169. When using a Chainsaw, the Competitor must at all times: 
(a) be in full and complete control; 
(b) hold both handles in a firm grip with the hands, thumbs and fingers; 
(c) ensure that no person is near or in the vicinity of the Chainsaw such that injury 
could be sustained by that person. 
170. Only a Competitor may hold an operating Chainsaw.  Other than when immediately 
adjacent to the block intended to be cut, a Competitor must not walk whilst holding an 
operating Chainsaw. 
171. Only a single Competitor may use a Chainsaw.  Competitors in an Event must use the 
same Chainsaw throughout that Event.   
172. A Chainsaw may not be used in an Event unless, prior to the commencement of the 
Event, that Chainsaw has been inspected by the Official in Charge, or his delegate, and 
approval to use the Chainsaw for that Event has been provided. 
Chainsaw Speed Events 
173. A final call will be made 2 minutes before the start of each Event.  A Competitor not 
present at the designated place in the Arena at the Start Time is automatically 
Disqualified from that Event. 
174. The starting method for an Event will be as nominated by the Official in Charge. 

--- page 22 ---
 
 22 
175. In the event of a mechanical fault in the Chainsaw at the start of an Event, the Official in 
Charge has the discretion to stop the Event and allow up to 3 minutes for the fault to be 
rectified.  Upon the expiration of the period allowed for rectification of the fault, the Event 
must be re-started, If the fault has not been rectified within the time allowed, the 
Competitor must immediately leave the Arena. 
176. A Competitor who has qualified for a semi-final, or a final of an Event must use the same 
Chainsaw (with the same chain) for the semi-final and the final of that Event as was used 
previously in the heat for that Event. This Rule does not prevent a Competitor from 
sharpening the chain, or adjusting the tension of the chain, before the semi-final and/or 
the final of the Event. 
177. The cutting procedure and sequence must be as follows: 
(a) 3 full discs are to be cut from the block by the Competitor; 
(b) The distance of 10cm (4 inches) is to be marked on the block in pen or chalk 
(except in the case of a Hotsaw  Event, where the distance marked must be 15cm 
(6 inches). 
(c) The block marking as per (b) must be visible around the entire block.   
(d) Except as provided in (b) and (c), no other marking is allowed on a block; 
(e) At the start, the Competitor must first pierce (through the centre) the top of the 
block, cut down and then up for the first disc, then cut down for the second disc 
and then cut up for the third disc; 
(f) if a disc has not been completely severed from the block, the Competitor must 
complete the cut from the same direction as that cut originally started from. 
Hotsaw Events (for Open Hotsaw Events, see rules 187 to 200) 
178. The cutting procedure and sequence must be as follows: 
(a) The Competitor must first bore through the block, hitting the marked line on both 
sides of the block; 
(b) On completion of (a), the Competitor must then cut down and then up to complete 
the cut for the first disc.  The second disc must be cut from above the block and 
down, and the third disc from underneath the block and up. 
179. Fuel used for a Hotsaw must not include any alcohol or any substance which burns with a 
flame not readily visible to the eye. 
Stocksaw Race 
180. The cutting procedure and sequence will be as provided in Rule 177 above. 
181. At an Event, a Stocksaw may only be used by a single Competitor: swapping of 
Stocksaws is prohibited. 
Operator's race 
182. All Competitors must use identical Chainsaws that have been supplied by the same 
manufacturer, retailer or sponsor. 
183. The allocation of a Chainsaw to each Competitor will be in accordance with a ballot 
conducted and drawn by the Committee. 

--- page 23 ---
 
 23 
184. The procedure and sequence will be as provided in Rule 177, or as otherwise determined 
by the Committee. 
General  
185. Rules 160 to 184 are binding in respect of all  Chainsaw Events and Competitions and no 
SAA or Local Association, seeking to conduct, or in fact conducting, a Chainsaw 
Competition may make any rule, or adopt any practice or procedure, that is inconsistent 
with those Rules.  However, this does not prevent any such SAA, or Local Association 
from adopting any rule in respect of a Chainsaw Competition that is not inconsistent with 
those Rules and which enhances safety. 
OPEN HOTSAW COMPETITIONS 
186. An Open Hotsaw may be configured in such manner as the Competitor chooses but may 
have only 1 cylinder (or rotor), must be equipped with a tuned exhaust system, a sprocket 
cover and a chain keeper, and there must be no alteration to the chain side strap. 
187. Prior to the commencement of any Open Hotsaw Event, all Open Hotsaws intended to be 
used in that Event must be presented for inspection by the Official in Charge, or his 
delegate. 
188. An Open Hotsaw may only be used in an Event if, following the inspection provided for in 
Rule 188, permission has been granted by the Official in Charge or his delegate.  The 
Official in Charge must not grant that permission unless he has been advised, in writing, 
by a suitably technically qualified and experienced independent person that the Open 
Hotsaw is safe to use.  Nonetheless, the decision whether or not to grant permission is 
wholly at the discretion of the Official in Charge (or his delegate, as appropriate) and must 
not be called into question by a Competitor. 
189. No person may make any modification of any kind or description to an Open Hotsaw after 
inspection as provided in Rule 188 unless directed to do so by the Official in Charge or his 
delegate. 
190. At all times when carrying, testing or operating an Open Hotsaw, a Competitor must be 
wearing safety protection equipment that is appropriate in the circumstances, including at 
least eye and ear protection and chaps or pants that are cut proof.  The Official in Charge 
(or his delegate) may direct that a Competitor comply with any requirement which the 
Official in Charge, or his delegate, considers is desirable in the interests of safety. 
191. When operating an Open Hotsaw, a Competitor's hands must be placed in such a way so 
that the Competitor's fingers (not the thumb) of each hand break the plane of a line drawn 
longitudinally down the centre of the block. 
192. An Open Hotsaw may only be started and operated in the area designated for that 
purpose by the Committee, which area must include safety screens of no less than 600 x 
1500 positioned in such a way as to protect persons in the area from impact of shavings 
thrown during operation of the Open Hotsaw. 
193. At all times when an Open Hotsaw is operating, it must be held and must be pointing in a 
manner and direction that is safe for all Competitors and other persons in the vicinity. 
194. In an Open Hotsaw Event, the block must be marked with a line drawn around the entire 
block, approximately 6 inches (15cm) from the end of the block.  If during the conduct of 
the Event the line is severed or the Competitor cuts on the other side of the line, the 
Competitor is Disqualified. 
195. For the start, a starter cord tether must be used where the Open Hotsaw has a 
detachable starter cord.  If a second starter cord is required, a tether is not required, but 
the second starter cord must remain within the area defined by the safety screens, failing 
which the Competitor is Disqualified.   

--- page 24 ---
 
 24 
196. Prior to commencement of the warmup for the Event, all persons, other than the 
Competitor, must vacate the area in which the Event will take place, and must stay in 
such position as may have been nominated by the Committee for that purpose.   
197. A period of 60 seconds will be allowed for warming up an Open Hotsaw.  Immediately 
following that period of 60 seconds, the Open Hotsaw must be shut off, placed on the 
ground, and the Competitor's hands must be resting on the top of the block until such time 
as the starter's gun is fired (or other signal to start is given). 
198. The start of the Event will be announced as follows: "Timers ready, Competitors ready, 60 
seconds to warm up starts now, 30 seconds, shut down saws, hands on the block, get 
set".  The gun will be fired, or other signal to start given, 1 to 2 seconds after the words 
"get set", at which point the timer starts. 
199. The Competitor must make 3 complete cuts of the block: first cut down, second cut up, 
third cut down.  If a disk is not complete, the Competitor may make a fourth cut, either up 
or down.  If there are not 3 complete disks, the Competitor is Disqualified. The timer stops 
when the last disk is completely severed. 
200. Rules 187 to 200 are binding in respect of all Open Hotsaw Events and Competitions and 
no SAA or Local Association, seeking to conduct, or in fact conducting an Open Hotsaw 
Event or Competition may make any rule, or adopt any practice or procedure, that is 
inconsistent with those Rules.  However, this does not prevent any such SAA or Local 
Association from adopting any rule in respect of an Open Hotsaw Competition that is not 
inconsistent with those Rules and which enhances safety. 
 
PROTESTS 
201. Subject to these Rules, a Competitor directly affected by the placings in any Event may 
lodge a Protest.  A Protest may be lodged verbally or in writing, but a verbal Protest must 
be confirmed in writing if so required by the Official in Charge. 
202. All Protests must be accompanied by a fee of $50 (or such greater amount as the 
Committee may have announced prior to the Competition).  If the Protest is upheld, the 
fee is returned; if the Protest fails, the fee is forfeited. 
203. All Protests must be made to the Official in Charge, or his deputy, either before, or within 
10 minutes of, the public announcement of the placings in the Event.  Late Protests will 
not be accepted. 
204. The Committee will consider the Protest and announce its decision as soon as 
practicable.  Where there is Technology in use which would assist the consideration of the 
Protest, it is to be used.  The Committee's decision in relation to the Protest is final. 
205. No person, other than the Committee and the Judge, is allowed into any area where they 
may see any equipment used in the judging process. Breach of this Rule may be 
penalized in such manner as the Committee sees fit, including relegation of the 
Competitor to last place in the Event in respect of which this Rule was breached. 
206. Despite Rule 205, but only after any Protest has been determined, the Competitor who 
has lodged the Protest in question may, at the Committee's discretion, be permitted to 
view the video recording of the Event 
207. Parents / Guardians of Junior competitors can attend protest hearings. 
TIMING 
208. Timing of all Events must be to the nearest one hundredth of a second. 

--- page 25 ---
 
 25 
LOG INSPECTION AFTER CUTTING 
209. At the end of each Event the Judge and an Official will inspect each log for compliance 
with these Rules.  They will then signal that everything is in order, or not. If the inspection 
reveals a breach of these Rules, which could affect the placings, the Official in Charge 
must then be so advised.  The Judge and the Official in Charge must then determine 
whether or not the Rules have been breached and in doing so, may have regard to what 
is revealed by any Technology recording of the Event.   
JUDGING 
210. Each Event is initially judged visually by the Judge, who will then provide his assessment 
of placings to the Official in Charge or his deputy.  If there is more than one Judge and 
they have differing opinions as to the placings, the matter must be referred to the Official 
in Charge who will then determine the matter using such Technology as may be available.  
Subject only to the right of a Competitor to Protest (if permitted by these Rules) and the 
application of Rule 206, the decision of the Official in Charge will be final and conclusive.   
211. If an Event is recorded using Technology, the Judge and the Official in Charge, or his 
deputy, may have regard to what is shown on the recording in coming to a decision. 
PRIZE MONEY 
212. If there is prize money payable in respect of an Event, it will be paid in such manner as 
the Committee decides. 
213. If prize money is payable to a Competitor who lives out of Australia, the Competitor 
assumes the risk of currency fluctuations and of any fees that may be payable in respect 
of international transfer of funds. 
214. In circumstances where GST is, or may be, payable on or in respect of prize money, a 
Competitor must comply with the requirements of the Committee in respect of GST 
obligations. 
AAA CHAMPIONSHIP RULES 
215. A Championship may only be conducted with the prior permission of the AAA and the 
applicable registration fee paid. 
216. All applications for permission to conduct an Australian or World Title Championship must 
be made by the Secretary of the relevant SAA  to the Secretary of the AAA and be 
accompanied by a copy of the proposed program of Events for the Competition at which 
the Championship is to be conducted. 
217. At the same time as the application is made to the AAA for permission to conduct a 
Championship, the Secretary of the relevant SAA must also send to each Secretary of all 
other SAAs a copy of the proposed program of Events, which program must then be 
circulated by those other SAAs so as to allow intending Competitors not less than a 
further 45 days in which to enter the Competition. 
218. All Australian and World Title Championships must, following the grant of permission from 
the AAA, be immediately advertised in such manner as the AAA may direct. 
219. An application to conduct an Australian or World Title Championship must be made no 
later than 90 days before the date of the Competition. 
220. Permission to conduct a Championship will not be provided unless there will be in place at 
the Competition suitable Technology which will allow the Events to be accurately 
recorded. 
221.  

--- page 26 ---
 
 26 
(a) Competitors wishing to compete in a Championship Event must proceed through 
a series of heats on the day.  Only the winners of those heats, and such place getters as 
the Committee determines, are permitted to compete in the Championship Event.  In the 
case of an Australian or World Title Championship, there must be at least 8 Competitors 
in the final Event. 
(b)  In the final Event, if any of the finalists were placed in the first 4 places of the 
Event when last conducted, they should be placed in the corresponding position. 
222. An Event to determine an Australian or World Champion may be conducted annually or 
more frequently as the AAA permits. 
223. A Championship will not be permitted unless there is a minimum amount of prize money 
available for the winner and place getters, as determined by the AAA. 
224. It is the responsibility of those conducting a Championship to ensure that logs used in the 
Championship have been protected from dehydration, are sound and of the same 
dimension (within applicable tolerances) and are cut from the same tree. 
225. Only the following Events are recognized by the AAA as Championships: 
Australian Titles 
Underhand 275mm, 300mm, 325mm, 350mm, 375mm and 400mm; 
Standing block 250mm, 275mm, 300mm, 325mm, 350mm, 375mm and 400mm; 
Hard Hitting Underhand 300mm; 
Hard Hitting Standing Block 300mm; 
Tree Felling 275mm, 300mm and 325mm; 
Butcher's Block 500mm and 600mm; 
Single Handed Sawing 375mm 
Double Handed Sawing 450mm; 
Combination (single man and 2 man) 250mm, 275mm and 300mm;  
Jack and Jill 375mm 
Jill and Jill 375mm  
Jill single handed sawing 325mm (minimum size) 
Ladies' Underhand 275mm 
U/21 Underhand 
Junior Underhand and Standing Block 250mm 
Hotsaw 450mm 
 
World Titles 
Underhand 300mm, 325mm, 350mm and 375mm; 
Standing block 300mm, 325mm, 350mm and 375mm; 
Combination 250mm , 275mm and 300mm; 
Tree Felling 325mm, 300mm 
Single Handed Sawing 375mm 
Double Handed Sawing 600mm. 
 
Local Association Championships 
226. Local Association Championships may be conducted not more frequently than annually 
by a Local Association which may be either Open or Restricted. 
227. Any person may enter an Open Local Association Championship. 
228. A Restricted Local Association Championship may be entered only by persons who meet 
the restrictions as defined by the Committee conducting the Competition. 
229. The Committee conducting a Local Association Championship must ensure that no later 
than 2 months before the date on which the Championship is to be conducted: 

--- page 27 ---
 
 27 
(a) the Competition is widely advertised in print media circulating within the relevant 
Area; 
(b) the AAA and the relevant SAA have been notified in writing of the proposed 
Competition. 
State Championships 
230. A State Championship may be conducted as frequently as the relevant SAA determines. 
231. Any person may enter an Open State Championship. 
232. A Restricted State Championship may be restricted to 32 (or a lesser number) of 
Backmarkers. 
233. The SAA conducting a State Championship must ensure than no later than 2 months 
before the date on which the State Championship is to be conducted: 
(a) the Competition is widely advertised in print media circulating within the relevant 
State; 
(b) if the Competition is wholly or in part a Restricted Competition, full details of the 
applicable restrictions are included in that advertising. 
234. In the case of a Competitor at a State Championship who is not normally resident in the 
State in question winning an Event, that Competitor may receive any applicable Award, 
but shall not be eligible for, and shall not be awarded, any points for any Champion of 
Champions Competition within that State. 
Elimination Championships 
235. Elimination Championships may be cut on any size log (permitted by Rules) and cut as an 
Underhand or Standing Block Event. 
236. The Event shall be restricted to the top 16 or the top 24 (as the Committee may decide) 
Competitors on handicap at the start of the day. 
237. The Event shall be cut in pairs, with the top ranked Competitor competing against the 
lowest ranked (ie no. 16), the second ranked competing against the second lowest (ie no. 
15) and so on. 
238. At the discretion of the Committee, any reserves shall be slotted into the same position as 
the Competitor the reserve is replacing, regardless of the reserve's handicap ranking. If 
there are not enough reserves such that all Competitors cut in pairs, the single Competitor 
must cut alone to be considered for eligibility in the ensuing round. 
239. On the next occasion, the same event is contested, the first 4 place getters in that 
preceding year are automatically entitled to compete in the Event in the following year and 
will be ranked in the same positions as they attained in the Event in the preceding year."  
To be amended to read “on the next occasions it is contested. 
Recognised competitions by Promoters 
240. Any Promoter that wishes to conduct a Competition in which the results of Championship 
Events will be recognized by the AAA and SAAs must comply with Rules 241 to 243 
below. 
241. Not less than 3 months before the date on which the Competition is to be conducted, the 
Promoter must apply in writing to the SAA of the State in which the Competition is to be 
held, which application must include the following information: 

--- page 28 ---
 
 28 
(a) the name and address of the person(s) responsible for the Competition; 
(b) the intended date and venue for the proposed Competition; 
(c) full particulars of the area in which the Competition is to be conducted, including 
the size of that area, the equipment intended to be used to secure the logs for 
chopping, facilities for spectators (including parking) and measures to be taken to 
ensure safety for Competitors and spectators; 
(d) the species of timber intended to be used, its source and the name and address of 
the person responsible for supplying the timber; 
(e) the names and addresses of all persons who constitute the Committee in respect 
of the Competition; 
(f) full particulars of all Awards that may be awarded in respect of Events at the 
Competition; 
(g) the source and total amount of money available to fund the holding of the 
Competition;  
(h) any other information that the SAA may require. 
242. The SAA may in its discretion and without assigning any reason, withhold permission for 
the conduct of the Championship Event. 
243. If the SAA approves the Championship Event, the following applies: 
(a) an authorized representative of the relevant SAA must be present at the 
Championship Event; 
(b) immediately following the announcement of the winner and place getters of a 
Championship Event, the Promoter must supply that representative with written 
confirmation thereof, together with their times of cut; 
(c) the authorized representative will arrange for that information to be included in the 
AAA's record of Champions. 
244. The result of a Championship Event that has not been conducted in strict compliance with 
Rules 241 to 243 inclusive will not be recognized by the AAA.   
DIMENSIONS AND SPACING RECOMMENDATIONS 
245. The dimension and spacing provisions set out below are recommended minimums, 
having regard to the issue of safety.  If a Committee considers that in the particular 
circumstances greater spacing should be provided, then the Committee should do so. 
246. The Arena should be of such a size that it can accommodate all of the equipment that will 
be required for the Competition.  The boundary of the Arena should be a physical barrier 
and will indicate the boundary behind which those observing the competition should 
remain. 
247. Equipment used for Standing Block Events should be (if practical) no less than 4m apart 
and from the boundary of the Arena, and no less than 600mm high above ground level. 
248. Equipment used for Underhand Events should be (if practical) no less than 3m apart and 
4m from the boundary of the Arena and hold the log between 100mm and 150mm above 
ground level. 

--- page 29 ---
 
 29 
249. Equipment used for Sawing Events should be no less than 4m apart and 2m from the 
boundary of the Arena and, where practical, adjustable in height above ground to suit the 
particular Competitor. 
250. Trees should be in a line and be no less than 4m apart and (if practical) 5m from the 
boundary of the Arena.  The top of a three board tree pole (excluding the log to be 
chopped) should be at least 3.9m above ground level.  The top of a 2 board tree pole 
should be no less than 2.9m above ground level. 
THE COMMITTEE 
251. The Committee is: 
(a) responsible for the running and organization of the Competition; 
(b) empowered to do all things necessary or desirable to that end: 
(c) subject to these Rules, the final arbiter on any matter arising in relation to the 
Competition. 
252. The following Officials may be appointed by the Committee: 
(a) An Official in Charge (who may also be styled Chief Steward or Steward in Chief) 
who is responsible to the Committee for the conduct of the Competition and the 
apportionment of tasks to other Officials; 
(b) Stewards in respect of the logs (to ensure that the quality, quantity and size of the 
logs are in conformity with these Rules) and the Arena (to ensure the proper 
conduct of Events in conformity with these Rules and the requirements of the 
Committee); 
(c) Starters and Check Starters and such other stewards as the Committee considers 
are required for the purpose of the smooth running of the Competition; 
(d) Judges as may be required for the Competition. 
ROLE OF OFFICIALS 
253. The role of an Official is to undertake the tasks assigned by the Committee or the Official 
in Charge. 
254. An Official must not provide any advice or guidance to a Competitor in respect of any 
matter which could give that Competitor an advantage over other Competitors  
CONDUCT AND DISCIPLINE (at Committee and SAA level) 
255. The Committee is empowered to deal with all breaches of these Rules in such manner as 
the Committee deems fit.  Other than providing an opportunity to be heard in respect of an 
alleged breach of the Rules, the Committee is not bound by any rules of procedural 
fairness and may: 
(a) obtain evidence in such manner and from such persons as the Committee sees fit; 
(b) have regard to hearsay evidence, provided such evidence is corroborated by 
other evidence. 
(c) undertake its deliberations in such manner and at such times and places as the 
Committee considers appropriate; 
(d) conduct its business by means of electronic communication and without meeting; 

--- page 30 ---
 
 30 
(e) determine any penalty without first giving the person concerned an opportunity to 
be heard in respect of penalty. 
256. Any person who, whether present at a Competition, or not, acts in breach of these Rules, 
may be dealt with by the Committee. 
257. At a Competition all persons must: 
(a) conduct themselves in a polite, civil manner; 
(b) obey any direction given by the Committee or an Official; 
(c) comply with these Rules; 
(d) not be unruly, or cause or contribute to any dissent or argument over any matter 
relating to an Event or the Competition; 
(e) in the case of a competitor, not compete with any alcohol in the bloodstream, nor 
consume an alcoholic beverage until after the competitor has competed in the last 
event for the day in question 
(f) not within 72 hours of the start of, or during, a Competition take or consume any 
drug, whether or that drug may affect the Competitor's performance, unless: 
(i) that drug has been prescribed by a medical practitioner and a copy of the 
prescription has been provided to the Committee before the Competitor 
competes in any Event; 
(ii) in the case of a drug that has not been prescribed by a medical 
practitioner, particulars have been provided to the Committee before the 
Competitor competes in an Event, and 
(iii) in the case of each of (i) and (ii) above, the Committee is of the opinion 
that the Competitor should be allowed to compete. 
(g) not deceive, or in any way attempt to deceive, the Committee or any Official at the 
Competition; 
(h) strictly adhere to the Code of Conduct; 
(i) and whether or not at a Competition, not, by their words or actions, denigrate or 
bring into disrepute the AAA, any SAA or any Local Association, or any person, 
connected in any way with the sport of woodchopping and sawing. 
258. A person is deemed to have breached Rule 257(a) if that person conducts himself in an 
unacceptable manner. Unacceptable conduct includes, without limitation, bad or 
unseemly language,  denigration of other persons, displays of temper, mistreatment of an 
axe or saw, throwing anything, dropping anything to the ground from a height above 
ground level, unjustified complaint concerning the timber, the timber supplier or any 
Official, and any other conduct which in the opinion of the Committee is contrary to the 
interests of the sport of woodchopping and sawing. 
259. Conduct in breach of Rule 257(a) will incur an immediately payable fine of $50 plus such 
other additional penalty that the Committee in its discretion may decide to impose.   
260. If at any Competition a Competitor breaches Rule 257(a) on more than one occasion, a 
fine of $100 in respect of each breach after the first, is immediately incurred and payable, 
plus such other additional penalty that the Committee in its discretion may decide to 
impose. 

--- page 31 ---
 
 31 
261. A Competitor who has been fined as provided in Rules 259 and 261 is Disqualified from 
further competing at the Competition until the fine has been paid. 
262. If during a Competition, or a series or number of Competitions, a Competitor acts in 
breach of any of the provisions of Rule 257, on more than 3 occasions, the relevant 
Committee: 
(a) may declare the Competitor ineligible from further competing at that Competition, 
and/or any subsequent Competition conducted by the Committee, for such period 
as the Committee sees fit; 
(b) must promptly inform the relevant SAA and the AAA of the circumstances. 
(c) In circumstances where a Competitor has, during a series of Competitions, in the 
opinion of the relevant Committees, acted in breach of any of the provisions of 
Rule 257, the SAA may declare the Competitor ineligible to enter or compete in 
any Competition for a nominated period (not exceeding 25 years in duration).  
There is no appeal from a decision of the SAA on this issue. 
263. When imposing a penalty for a breach of any of these Rules, the Committee shall have an 
unfettered discretion to impose such penalty as it considers appropriate in the 
circumstances, which may comprise or include a monetary fine, suspension or 
cancellation of membership, Disqualification, a declaration of ineligibility from entering or 
being present at any Competition, or any combination of the foregoing. 
264. Where the Committee has found that a Competitor has breached any provision of Rule 
257, the Committee must promptly notify the Secretary of the relevant SAA, the Secretary 
of the AAA and all other members of the AAA.   
Appeal from decision of a Committee 
265. Any person who has been found by a Committee to have breached Rule 257 in any 
respect may within 14 days (time being of the essence) of such finding appeal to the 
committee of the relevant SAA against the finding, save that no appeal is available 
unless: 
(a) the person was denied an opportunity to be heard as provided in in Rule 255; or 
(b) there exists new evidence which was not available and could not have been 
placed before the Committee. 
266. An appeal under Rule 265 must be in writing and lodged with the Secretary of the relevant 
SAA, accompanied by a copy of all documents in the possession of the person concerned 
that were before the Committee. 
267. The committee of the SAA has the discretion to not accept the appeal, if it considers, on 
the basis of the papers before it, that Rule 255 has been substantially complied with and 
the decision of the Committee was correct.  
268. Subject to Rule 269, an appeal to the SAA under Rule 265 must be dealt with by the 
committee of that SAA (excluding therefrom any member of the committee who is a 
member of the Local Association in respect of whose Committee the appeal is brought) 
within 30 days of the appeal being lodged with the Secretary of that SAA. If not dealt with 
within 30 days, the appeal is deemed to have been allowed. 
269. An appeal to the committee of the SAA is not a re-hearing and must be restricted to 
determining the issues raised as permitted by Rule 265. 
270. The outcome of any appeal , must be promptly notified to the appellant and to the 
Secretary of the AAA and all other members of the AAA. 

--- page 32 ---
 
 32 
DISCIPLINARY ROLE OF THE AAA 
271. In circumstances where: 
(a) a SAA, a Local Association or any responsible person has referred a matter 
relating to the conduct of a person to the AAA to be dealt with by the AAA; or 
(b) the conduct in question has occurred at any time whilst the person concerned is a 
member of a team representing Australia or any State of Australia; or 
(c) any axemen's association within a country other than Australia has referred a 
matter relating to the conduct of a person whilst in that country to the AAA to be 
dealt with by the AAA, 
the AAA has jurisdiction to investigate, adjudicate, penalize and otherwise deal with the 
person allegedly engaged in that conduct or any person associated with that person in 
connection with that conduct. 
272. In dealing with a matter so referred to the AAA, the President of the AAA shall nominate 
persons - including at least one of the Vice Presidents and the Secretary/Treasurer but 
not exceeding 7 in number, who shall constitute the AAA for the purpose of dealing with 
the matter. 
273. In so dealing with a matter, the AAA may (but is not obliged to) adopt the procedures in 
Rule 255 and otherwise may conduct itself and reach decisions in such manner as it 
considers appropriate. 
274. There is no appeal from any decision of the AAA pursuant to Rule 271. 
275. The decision of the AAA, and the circumstances that are the subject of that decision, must 
be promptly notified by the AAA Secretary/Treasurer to each member of the AAA and 
each member of the AAA must then promptly notify each Local Association within the 
relevant State. 
DISPUTES COMMITTEE 
276. The Committee has the discretion to authorize the establishment of a Disputes 
Committee.  If so authorized, a Disputes Committee may be established prior to, or 
during, the conduct of a Competition.  The Disputes Committee will comprise one member 
of the Committee, an Official with responsibility for the Arena, and 2 representatives of the 
relevant SAA.  The names of the persons who are members of the Disputes Committee 
will be made known by public notice, or announcement, as soon as practical following its 
establishment. 
277. The role of the Disputes Committee is to informally and without delay conciliate any 
issues or complaints raised by Competitors, relating to the Competition.  If any matter 
cannot be resolved by the Disputes Committee, it will be reported to the Committee for 
further attention. 
MEDIA EXPOSURE 
278. By entering a Competition, Competitors agree that the Committee, or a person authorized 
by the Committee, has the right to film, photograph or otherwise record the image, 
appearance, name, voice and likeness of the Competitor and to use that material in any 
way and in any media (and without the Competitor having any right of prior inspection or 
approval).  Each Competitor warrants to the Committee that the use of such material in 
any manner as contemplated by this Rule will not infringe the rights of any other person. 

--- page 33 ---
 
 33 
RESPONSIBILITY FOR POSSESSIONS 
279. Competitors are solely responsible for the security of their own possessions and neither 
the Committee nor any other person in any way connected with the organization or 
conduct of the Competition accepts any responsibility for lost, mislaid or stolen property.   
RELAY COMPETITIONS - ADDITIONAL RULES 
Interstate and Overseas Team Relay Contests 
280. This Event (Underhand and Standing Block) shall comprise teams of 6 Competitors 
including a captain as approved by the Committee.  The procedure for cutting shall be as 
in a Combination Contest (see Rules 146 to 149). 
281. Teams medley relay Events shall consist of 4 teams of 7 Competitors as approved by the 
Committee.  Unless otherwise determined by the Committee, Competitors must cut in the 
following order: Butcher's Block, Underhand, Double Handed Sawing, Standing Block and 
Tree Felling. 
International Relays 
282. The men's international relay team shall consist of 7 Competitors including a captain and 
will be run over 3 contests and consist of and be cut in the following order: 325mm 
Underhand, 325mm Standing Block, 375mm Single Handed Sawing, 500mm Double 
Handed Sawing, 325mm Underhand and 325mm Standing Block.  At the discretion of the 
Committee, the team may be increased to 8 Competitors by the addition of a Competitor 
using a Chainsaw 
283. The women's international relay team shall consist of 7 Competitors including a captain 
and will be run over 3 contests and shall consist of and be cut in the following order: 
275mm Underhand, 375mm Double Handed Sawing, 325mm Single Handed Sawing, 
375mm Double Handed Sawing and 275mm Underhand. 
284. The under 21 international relay team shall consist of 7 Competitors including a captain 
and consist of and be cut in the following order: 300mm Underhand, 300mm Standing 
Block, 350mm Single Handed Sawing, 400mm Double Handed Sawing, 300mm 
Underhand and 300mm Standing Block. 
Under 21 Interstate Relay 
285. The under 21 interstate relay   shall consists of 7 Competitors including a captain and will 
be run over 3 contests and shall consist of and be cut as provided in Rule 284..  . 
Veterans Relay 
286. The veterans relay shall consist of 9 Competitors including a captain and will be run over 
3 contests and shall consist of and be cut in the following order: 300mm Underhand, 
275mm Standing Block, 350mm Single Handed Sawing, 300mm Underhand, 275mm 
Standing Block, 450mm Double Handed Sawing, 300mm Underhand and 275mm 
Standing Block. 
Area Association Relay 
287. This Event shall comprise a team of 7 Competitors including a captain and shall consist of 
and be cut in the following order: Butcher's Block, Underhand, Double Handed Sawing, 
Standing Block and Tree Felling. 
 
COMPETITIONS CONDUCTED BY A ROYAL SHOW SOCIETY 

--- page 34 ---
 
 34 
Additional Rules that may apply  
288. At a Competition conducted by a Royal Show Society, there may be additional rules that 
apply in respect of matters such as conduct, behavior and discipline, access to areas,  
Arena arrangements and control, prohibited drugs (and testing for them).  All Competitors 
at such a Competition are bound by any such additional rules, as well as these Rules. 
289. Any Show / Carnival / Event may apply to the AAA with regards to adapting specific rules, 
outside of the AAA Competition Rules, according to their requirements.  Applications must 
be in writing and dealt with by AAA Executive in a timely manner. 
 
 
DEFINITIONS 
AAA means the Australian Axemen's Association. 
Arena  means that part of the area in which the Competition is conducted from which the public is 
excluded and in which Competitors are to compete. 
Area means the area in respect of which an association or club, not being a SAA, defines itself. 
Award means any ribbon, prize (whether or not in cash), trophy or other benefit that a Competitor 
may be eligible for as a result of an Event or a Competition. 
Australian Team means a team that has been selected by the AAA to compete in a Competition 
intended to be held outside of Australia. 
Axemen's Association means an association that is a member of the AAA and referred to in 
these Rules as a State Axemen's Association (SAA) 
Backmarker means the last person in a handicapped Event to commence cutting. 
Blow (hard hitting) means striking the log with either the cutting edge of the axe or the back of the 
axe head in order to sever the log in half. 
Chainsaw means any chainsaw that: 
(a) is a standard chainsaw as sold to the general public, and 
(b) does not exceed 110cc in power capacity, 
(c) has not been modified in any way, and 
unless otherwise required by the context, includes a Hotsaw. 
Chainsaw Event means any Competition which comprises, or includes, a Chainsaw contest 
involving the use of a Chainsaw or a Hotsaw. 
Championship means an unhandicapped Event in which the winner is described as a champion. 
Code of Conduct means the Code that is set out in  Schedule One to these Rules and includes 
any Code of Conduct from time to time published by the Australian Sports Commission. 
Committee means the committee responsible for the organization and conducting of a 
Competition, and any decision or discretion of the Committee referred to in these Rules may be 
exercised in such manner as the Committee deems fit. 

--- page 35 ---
 
 35 
Competition means any Event, or combination of Events, or carnival, in which a Competitor 
intends to, or does, compete. 
Competitor means a person who has entered a Competition and, where applicable, includes a 
person competing at Junior or Novice level;. 
Deputy means a person who is a member of  Local Association who is by these Rules permitted 
to undertake a task at the request of a Competitor. 
Discipline means each of the following: Underhand, Standing Block, Tree Felling, Single Handed 
Sawing and Double Handed Sawing. 
Disqualified and Disqualification mean (unless otherwise decided by the body imposing the 
Disqualification) that the Competitor (or, where applicable, the team) is disqualified from 
competing in the Event or Competition in which, or in respect of which, the Disqualification was 
imposed.  Disqualification may (but need not) be signified by the placement of a red flag on the 
log (or, in the case of a tree, at the foot of the tree) after the Competitor has finished chopping or 
sawing. 
Dress means the attire specified in Rule 32 and, if applicable, Rule 97. 
Entry Form means the document, by whatever name called, which a person is required to 
complete and submit as a prerequisite to competing in a Competition. 
Equipment means the devices (sometimes called cradles) that are used to hold a log, or tree, in 
position for cutting. 
Event means a woodchopping or sawing or chainsaw contest.  An Event may comprise a single 
contest, or a contest that is divided into classes, divisions, heats, semi-finals and finals, or as 
determined by the Committee. 
Handicapper means a member approved and appointed as a Handicapper by a State of Local 
Woodchop Association Committee to grade a competitor in accordance with their ability, skills, 
experience and performance, at a Woodchop Carnival registered and conducted under the 
Constitution and Rules of the State or Local Assocation. 
Hotsaw means a Chainsaw that: 
(a) may be either single or twin cylinder; 
(b) does not exceed 140cc in power capacity (or has been modified so that it has 140cc 
power capacity (but no more)); 
(c) retains the original engine as installed by the manufacturer. 
Judge means the person appointed by the Committee to decide the winner and place getters in 
an Event. 
Junior means a person who has not attained the age of 18 years as at the date of the 
Competition in which the person seeks to compete. 
Junior Event mean an Event at which only Juniors may compete 
Local Association means any club, district or local association the members of which are 
involved in or with the sport of woodchopping and sawing and which is a member of a SAA; 
Maintenance means checking, repairing and testing a Chainsaw or  Hotsaw for the purpose of 
ensuring that it is safe to use and otherwise complies with these Rules 
Month means a calendar month. 

--- page 36 ---
 
 36 
Novice means a Competitor who has not won an Open Event in the Discipline in question. 
Official means any person appointed as such by the Committee in respect of a Competition (and 
includes a Judge and each member of the Committee). 
Official in Charge means the Official who has been appointed by the Committee to have overall 
responsibility for the conduct of the Competition and where applicable includes any Official to 
whom the Official in Charge has delegated a role, task or responsibility. 
Open Event mean an Event in which any person may compete. 
Open Hotsaw means a chainsaw that has been modified, or built, in such a way that it does not 
fit into the categories of Chainsaw or Hotsaw. 
Person includes a firm, a partnership and an incorporated entity. 
Promoter means any person or organization other than the AAA, a SAA, a Local Association or a 
Royal Show Society. 
Protest means to dispute the placings in an Event in the manner provided in Rules 201-207 
Push (hard hitting) means removing a chip with the back of the axe in a pushing motion and not 
in a manner to advance the cut or assist in severing the log in half. 
Restricted Event means an Event in which there is some restriction placed on either the axe, or 
on some other aspect of the Event. 
Royal Show Society means any and  each of  Royal Agricultural Society of New South Wales,   
Royal Agricultural Society of Victoria,  Royal National Agricultural and Industrial Association of 
Queensland, Royal National Capital Agricultural Society, Royal Agricultural & Horticultural Society 
of SA Inc,  Royal Agricultural Society of Tasmania, Royal National Agricultural & Pastoral Society 
of Tasmania Ltd, Royal Agricultural Society of WA and Royal Agricultural Society of the Northern 
Territory Inc. 
Rules means these Rules. 
SAA means a State Axemen's Association that is a member of the AAA. 
Secretary means the person who has been elected or appointed to hold that office. 
Scarf means the area beneath the surface of a log that is revealed as a result of chopping. 
Slab means the portion of a log which is dislodged as a result of a run to a saw cut, foothold or 
doghold, that exceeds 12mm in its greatest dimension at the saw cut, foothold or doghold end.  
Standing Block  means the style of woodchopping in which the Competitor stands on the ground 
and cuts a log fixed in the vertical position. 
Start Time means when the Event is due or scheduled to begin and, for the purpose of timing a 
Competitor, when the axe hits the log and, in a sawing Event, when the saw commences to cut. 
State Axemen's Association means any and each of: 
• Federation of NSW Axemen's Association Inc. 
• Victorian Axemen's Council 
• South Australia Axemen's Council 
• Queensland Axemen's Association Inc. 
• Tasmanian Axemen's Association Inc. 
• Axemen's Council of Western Australia. 
 
Stocksaw means a Chainsaw that: 

--- page 37 ---
 
 37 
(a) does not exceed 110cc in power capacity; 
 
(b) has not been modified from its "as manufactured" state; 
 
(c) must include a choke, air cleaner, exhaust, side cover and working chain brake, all as 
provided by the manufacturer. 
 
Technology means any device that has been provided by or at the request of the Committee for 
monitoring or recording any Event.  For the avoidance of doubt, technology of any kind or 
description that may have been used or provided by anyone other than the Committee is not 
Technology for the purpose of these Rules. 
Tree Felling means the style of woodchopping in which the Competitor ascends a timber pole for 
the purpose of chopping a log affixed to the top of the pole. 
Underhand means the style of woodchopping in which the Competitor stands on footholds to cut 
a log fixed in the horizontal position. 
Unrestricted Event means an Event in which there are no restrictions imposed in relation to an 
axe or the persons who may compete in the Event. 
Unregistered Competition means a Competition that has not been registered or approved in 
accordance with the rules of the relevant SAA. 
V cut means the style of wood cutting in which the block is severed predominantly using down 
blows to the front and back of the block. 
Veteran is a person who has attained the age of 60 years. 
Wedger means a member of a Local Association who, in a sawing contest, is engaged to place a 
wedge in a sawcut. 
INTERPRETATION 
The singular includes the plural and vice versa. 
A reference to the male gender includes the female gender (except in respect of an Event that is 
specifically described as applying to a particular gender). 
The words "log" and "block" are interchangeable and refer to the timber provided by the 
Committee for the Event. 
  

--- page 38 ---
 
 38 
SCHEDULE ONE 
Code of Conduct 
AAA's Aims 
The AAA is committed to fairness, equality and good sportsmanship in the sport of woodchopping 
and sawing.  The AAA's aims are: 
(a) for Competitors to be provided with the best possible environment in which to excel, and 
(b) for Officials and all persons involved in the administration of the sport to discharge their 
responsibilities in such a manner that Competitors are able to perform at their best. 
Purpose of the Code 
This Code of Conduct is intended to ensure that appropriate forms of behavior are adopted and 
remain the norm for all Competitors and other persons connected with the sport of woodchopping 
and sawing. 
Accordingly, this Code is intended to have application to all Competitors and other such persons. 
In addition, the Code of Conduct published from time to time by the Australian Sports 
Commission is deemed to be included in this Code and has application to all Competitors and 
such persons. 
Behaviour Protocols 
1. The AAA Competition Rules must at all times be complied with, both in word and spirit 
and intent. 
2. All requests or directions of Officials must be immediately complied with. 
3. At all times, all persons must conduct themselves in a polite and proper manner and not 
in any way that could bring the sport, or any person, into disrepute. 
4. All persons must be treated with respect and dignity and with proper regard for their rights 
and obligations. 
5. A Competitor must at all times compete and behave in a sportsmanlike manner and not 
do or attempt to do anything that may give them an unfair advantage or disadvantage 
another Competitor. 
6. Except in the case of medically prescribed substances, no person may use, or provide to 
another person, any substance that could affect the performance, or the behavior, of any 
other person. 
7. Alcoholic beverages must not be consumed on any day during which a Competitor will be 
competing, until after the Competitor has competed in his last Event for that day. 
8. Smoking is prohibited: 
(a) within or in the precincts of the Arena; 
(b) in any room or area set aside for the use of Competitors at a  Competition; 
(c) whilst the Competitor is dressed in any way that identifies him as a participant in 
the sport of woodchopping and sawing. 

--- page 39 ---
 
 39 
 